---
layout: post
title: Decision Making Under Uncertainty: Part 1
date: 2022-06-04
description: 
---
The goal of decision making is to take an optimal decision according to some optimality criterion. In high-stake scenarios, making an optimal decision is crucial to avoid catastrophic consequences. Imagine a doctor making a diagnosis for some patient, a wrong decision (in this case, diagnosis) can be life threatening. The goal of this post is to formalize decision making using probability theory, and argue why this is not enough. We will use the diagnosis of skin lesions as a running example to underscore the importance of optimal decision making.

**Setting** We assume a finite set of all the decisions available to the decision maker. Denote this set by $$\mathcal{D}$$, and the decision maker aims to take some decision $$d$$ from $$\mathcal{D}$$. In the skin lesion diagnosis setting, a doctor has to decide whether the legion is benign $$(d_{1})$$ or cancerous $$(d_{2})$$. A doctor may also choose to refer to senior doctor $$(d_{3}$$, or refer to the psychatrist $$(d_{4}$$. Thus, $$\mathcal{D} = \{d_{1}, d_{2}, d_{3}, d_{4}\}$$. Of course, there are consequences of taking some decision $$d$$. We model consequence by attaching cost to each decision. A lesion could be cancerous, and the doctor may decide to label it as benign. This decision comes with a high cost. To model consequences of decision, we associate with each decision a random variable $$J_{d_{i}}: \mathcal{X} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$$. $$\mathcal{X}$$ is our possibility space, and the outcome $$x \in \mathcal{X}$$ is uncertain. For example, $$\mathcal{X} = \{\text{benign}, \text{cancerous}\}$$ for our running example. And $$J_{d_{1}}(x)$$ is very high when $$x = \text{cancerous}$$.